# phoneng README

## Overview

This phoneng program suite (short for: Phonetic English) shows how English
is pronounced and offers an alternative spelling system that is more
consistent and easier to learn and use than the traditional spelling.

TODO These programs aren't implemented yet.
The `pronounce` command shows how English texts are pronounced. The
`lytspel` command converts them into a simplified spelling.

The provided tools can also be used to implement your own spelling reform
proposals or to adapt the chosen respellings as needed.

## Installation

The phoneng program suite is written in
[Haskell](https://www.haskell.org/haskellwiki/Haskell). To build it from
source, you need the [Cabal](https://www.haskell.org/cabal/) build system.
If you use a Debian-based system, install the `cabal-install` package to
get it.

Afterwards clone this repository from GitHub and run the following commands
in the main directory:

    cabal configure && cabal build && cabal install

The compiled programs should now be in your path and ready to run.

## Usage

TODO document

## Defining own respelling schemes

TODO document

## Recreating the Phonetic Dictionary From Scratch

You normally don't need to to this, as the `phonetic-dict.txt` file is
distributed as part of this package. But if you want to recreate it from
scratch, you can use the `dictbuilder` to do so. Prior to doing this, you need
to download several knowledge sources:

  * Download SCOWL and VarCon from [SCOWL And
    Friends](http://wordlist.aspell.net/) -- version 2014.08.11 was used to
    create the distributed dictionary. Unzip both of them within the `data`
    directory and rename the resulting subdirectories to `scowl` and `varcon`.
  * Download the [CMU Pronouncing
    Dictionary](http://www.speech.cs.cmu.edu/cgi-bin/cmudict) -- version 0.7a
    was used to create the distributed dictionary. It's enough to download the
    file `cmudict.0.7a` and store it in a new `data` subdirectory named
    `cmudict`.
  * Download the [Moby Pronunciation List by Grady
    Ward](http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/3205). Created a `data` subdirectory
    named `moby` and unzip it there.

Now invoke `dictbuilder` within the `data` subdirectory to create a new version
of `phonetic-dict.txt`.

## Files and File Formats

All files are in UTF-8 format (some of them may use just the ASCII subset).

*Line files* (extension: .txt) have one entry per line; line breaks in entries
are therefore not allowed.

*CSV files* (extension: .csv) use a simple dialect of the widespread CSV
format. They have one entry per line and a list of fields in each entry.
Fields are separated by semicolons (not commas). Fields must not be surrounded
by quotation marks. The first line is considered as header line and ignored.
No escape syntax is supported, hence field values cannot contain semicolons or
line breaks.

### Files in data Directory

  * `cmudict-phonemes.csv`: CSV file containing a mapping from the phonemes
    used in cmudict (first field) to the corresponding Phonetic English
    phonemes (second field); further fields are ignored. Used by the
    `dictbuilder` program.
  * `moby-phonemes.csv`: CSV file containing a mapping from the phonemes used
    in Moby (first field) to the corresponding Phonetic English phonemes
    (second field); further fields are ignored. Used by the `dictbuilder`
    program.
  * `words-not-in-scowl.txt`: Line file containing words that aren't listed in
    SCOWL but should become part of the pronunciation dictionary. Used by the
    `dictbuilder` program.
  * `phonetic-dict.txt`: Line file containing a mapping from words to their
    pronunciations. If there is just a single pronunciations, the entry is
    written as `word: pron`. If the pronunciation of a word depends on which
    POS (part-of-speed) it is, it is written as `word/n: pron1; v: pron2`
    (where "n", "v" etc. are POS tags). Redirects are written as `word:>
    target`, e.g. `colour:> color`. Generated by the `dictbuilder` program.
