## News

Lytspel made it into the shortlist of six spelling reform proposals
considered in the final round of the [International English Spelling
Congress](http://spellingsociety.org/international-english-spelling-congress)
organized by the [English Spelling Society](http://spellingsociety.org/).
The final winner was [Traditional Spelling
Revised](http://spellingsociety.org/uploaded_views/traditional-spelling-revised-personal-view.pdf)
(PDF), a conservative proposal that eliminates the worst exceptions, but
still allows various spellings for most sounds, meaning that each word has
to be essentially memorized. While TSR would be a clear and considerable
improvement over the status quo and I therefore support its adaptation, I
still think that a principled solution such as Lytspel is ultimately
preferable, since it would largely eliminate the need for memorization and
make English truly follow the alphabetic principle.


## Scope and Purpose of This Website

The traditional English spelling system is afflicted with exceptions and
conflicting rules, making writing and reading texts unnecessarily hard.

**Lytspel** is a proposal for reforming the English spelling in order to
establish a predictable relationship between written letters and spoken
sounds. Lytspel (for «lytwait speling» or ‹lightweight spelling›) not only
creates an unambiguous mapping between the sounds used in English and their
written representations, it also indicates which syllable in each word is
the stressed one. See [Idea and Motivation](/idea) for more on why this
makes sense and how it would make everyone's life easier.

In addition to the online converter found above, this website also contains
a [short](/overview) and a [detailed explanation](/rules) of the rules of
Lytspel. We explicate how [pronunciation differences between regional
varieties of English](/intl) are handled and discuss a few inevitable
[limitations of the dictionary](/limitations) used by the online converter.
Additionally, we explain how to [install the converter on your own
computer](/cli) if you prefer to do that.

This website also contains several sample texts, showing traditional and
reformed spelling side by side: the [last chapter](/sample/alice) of
*Alice's Adventures in Wonderland,* by Lewis Carroll; Abraham Lincoln's
[Gettysburg Address](/sample/gettysburg), and the [Universal Declaration of
Human Rights](/sample/udhr).

As required by law and recommended by common sense, this website has a
[privacy policy](/privacy). You are welcome to [contact](/contact) us if
you have questions, ideas for improvement, or any other feedback.
