# Privacy Policy

Lytspel.org is a noncommercial website run by Christian Siefkes. We take
not only privacy, but also the data minimization very seriously.


## Data Protection

The topic of data protection is comprehensively regulated by the EU General
Data Protection Regulation (GDPR). To help you understand which data we
collect from you, how we process it, what we do to protect your data, and
whom to contact if you have any questions, weâ€™ve put together all the
relevant information on this page.


## Person Responsible and Scope

The person responsible according to the GDPR is:

Christian Siefkes  
Email: <christian@siefkes.net>

This privacy policy applies to the domain www.lytspel.org.


## Principles of Data Processing

Personal data is any information that relates to an identified or
identifiable natural person. This includes, for example, information such
as your name, age, address, phone number, date of birth, email address, IP
address, or user behavior. Information that we can not relate to your
person (or only with disproportionate effort), e.g. by anonymizing the
information, are not personal information. The processing of personal data
(e.g. collecting, querying, using, storing or transmitting) always requires
a legal basis or your consent. Processed personal data will be deleted as
soon as the purpose of the processing has been achieved and no legally
required retention requirements have to be maintained.

If we process your personal data for the purpose of providing certain
offers, we will subsequently inform you of the specific transactions, the
scope and purpose of the data processing, the legal basis for the
processing and the respective retention period.


## Use of This Websites

When you use this websites, we may create log files that contain the
date and time, the retrieved URL path, the referrer (if applicable) and the
browser used. However, we anonymize your IP address using IP masking, so
that we do not collect any personal data.


## Use of the Online Converter

When you enter text in the the input field entitled "Traditional spelling"
at <https://www.lytspel.org> and press the "Convert" button, the entered
text will be sent to our web server. There it is automatically converted
into the reformed Lytspel spelling and both the original and the converted
text are sent back to your web browser. While being processed on the
server, the text is only stored in memory, never on disk. At our side, no
person will ever look at the text or get any information about its
contents. The only thing we may log (in addition to the general information
mentioned above) is the number of characters in the original and the
converted text (that is, the length of the text).

When you select a file to upload and convert and press the "Convert file"
button, a copy of the selected file will be sent to our web server. There
it is automatically converted into the reformed Lytspel spelling and the
converted file is sent back to your web browser. For technical reason, both
the original and the converted file are stored on disk until the converted
file has been downloaded by you and possibly for a short additional period
of time; however, no file is ever stored for more than one hour. At our
side, no person will ever look at the files or get any information about
their contents. The only things we may log (in addition to the general
information mentioned above) are the number of characters in the original
and the converted file as well as the file extension (e.g. "txt" or
"html").


## Disclosure of Data

We do not deliberately collect any personal data on you or other persons;
however, personal data may be contained in the texts and files submitted to
our online converter. We never read these texts and files, nor do we share
them with anybody else.


## Use of Cookies

We do not use any cookies.


## Tracking and Analysis Tools

We do not use any external tracking and analysis tools.


## Social Network Plugins

We do not use any plugins of social networks.

## Links

You may occasionally find links to other websites on our website. By
activating these links you will be redirected to the website of another
operator, which you can recognize by the changed URL in the browser. We
have no control over their content and therefore do not have any
responsibility for how those other websites handle your personal
information. We have not checked if the operators of those websites comply
with the GDPR. Please inform yourself about it.


## Data Security and Security Measures

We are committed to protecting your privacy and keeping your personal
information confidential. In order to avoid manipulation, loss or misuse of
your data stored by us, we take extensive technical and organizational
security precautions, which are regularly checked and adapted to
technological progress. This includes, among other things, the use of
recognized encryption procedures. However, we would like to point out that,
due to the nature of the Internet, it is possible that the rules of data
protection and the above-mentioned security measures may not be followed by
other persons or institutions outside our area of responsibility. In
particular, unencrypted data can be read by third parties -- e.g. if sent
via email. We have no technical influence on this. It is your
responsibility to protect the data provided by you against misuse, e. g. by
utilizing encryption technology.
